(Launceston Examiner, Sat 28 Dec 1861, page 2)

DEATH OF JAMES DOUGLAS, ESQ.,
OF CAVERS.
We have to record the sudden death of
James Douglas, Esq., of Cavers, well
known as an able writer on religious
topics, and a man of great religious zeal,
which melancholy event took place at
Cavers House, Roxburghshire, at half
past seven o'clock on the morning of
Saturday. Mr. Douglas had been in a
critical state of health for some time pre
vious to leaving Edinburgh for Cavers
House, and his stay in the country had
not effected any improvement. About 10
o'clock on Friday morning, as Mr. Doug
las was in the act of leaving the library,
after having conducted the morning
family devotions, lie was struck with
paralytic seizure, and fell to the ground.
Dr. Thomson, ofHarwick, was summoned,
and was speedily in attendance, when he
had Mr. Douglas removed to bed, and on
examination found that the left side was
thoroughly paralysed, and his speech con
siderably affected, but otherwise lie was
conscious, and in possession of all his
faculties. All the appliances that medical
skill could suggest were put in execution,
and under the treatment Mr. Douglas
slightly improved for a short time; but
eventually the paralysis passed on to
apoplexy, notwithstanding the unremit
ting attention and skill of his attendants.
The family physician in Edinburgh was
summoned, but, being unable to attentl,
sent Dr. Moire in his stead, who arrived
in the course of the day, and confirmed
the anticipations of Dr. Thomson that the
case was hopeless, and could only recom
mend a continuance of the treatment
which had already been administered.
Mr. Douglas became perfectly un
conscious about seven o'clock on
Friday night, and remained in
that state up to the time of his death the
following morning. He was in the
seventy-first year of his age. Mr.
Douglas was the -eighteenth in descent
from -Archibald, second son of James,
second -Earl of Douglas, who was
killed at the battle of Otterburn, 21st
July, 1388. Archibald Douglas had from
his father the lands and bardny of COavers,
with the hereditable sheriflfhip of Teviot
dale. The hereditable sheriffship re
mained in the family till such jurisdic
tions were abolished by Act of Parliament,
shortly alter 1745. Mr. Douglas succeeded to the estates on the death of his
father in 1815, and was married to Emma,
daughter of Sir David Carnegie, Bart., of
Southesk, who survives him. Mr.
Douglas had issue two sons and five
daughters, five of whom (one son and
four daughters) are living. He is succeeded in his estates by his elder son,
James, who was married in June, 1858,
to Mary Graham, youngest daughter of
the late Sir Andrew Agnew. Mr.
Douglas in his younger days was a great
follower of most of the sports and pastimes
of the day; but gave up these after
becoming the subject of strong religious
impressions. Ie was a very voluminous
writer, principally on controversial sub
jects. The following are the titles of
somne of his principal works:-" The
Structure of Prophecy," "Popery and
Infidelity," "The Philosophy of the
Mind," "The Advancement of Society in
Knowledge and Religion," "Errors
Regarding Religion;" besides a large number of pamphlets, &c. In his ecclesiastical
connexion Mr. Douglas was a Congregationalist. Though active in person as
well as in pen in the promotion of his
opinions, lie was not fond of taking part
in public meetings not of a merely devo
tional character, though he onceor twice,
many years ago, presided at meetings of
the Voluntary Church Society
